four three two boom what's up man how
are you hello thanks for easier well I'm
pleased to get here it's a kind of a
strange day in this part of this is
strange as it ever gets there the big
concern in Los Angeles has always been
according to a firefighter that I've
talked to once that the right wind
catches a fire and it takes it all the
way through Los Angeles down to the
coast yeah
it's not quite that it didn't go through
Hollywood it didn't go they think one
day it's gonna happen and with the right
wind they're not gonna be able to stop
it but Jesus yes this is pretty bad
this is about as bad as I've ever seen
it happen all in one day yeah it was
extraordinary on the road to get here
just these huge just huge pillowy I
thought it was just you know mountains
and I thought it was a strange cloud
formation but it was just smoke smoke
yeah it looks like a giant gray mountain
yeah in the distance yeah it's it's
insane how bad it's gotten I've had it
happened three this is the third time
I've been evacuated since I've moved
here 20 plus years ago yeah it gets
rough but this is the roughest I've ever
seen Jamie and I were doing the podcast
yesterday and when it was over I had
like five text messages from friends
that live in my neighborhood saying how
bad it was and then when we got home the
wind was just crazy and it's just it's
just it's humbling you know I mean it's
super unfortunate for all the people
that are losing their homes and and
losing their you know losing their
property but the reality is this is its
nature you know this is just something
that you just can't avoid there's
nothing you can do about it gets dry
like this and I don't know what started
it I hope it wasn't a cigarette that's
the big actually so many morons to throw
in cigarettes it's not just a weather
thing that just happens it's it is
literally things like cigarettes and
yeah unfortunately a lot of the times I
mean the weather certainly accentuates
it because it's dry and windy and this
is fire season anyway
these incredibly comfortable chairs
they're not bad right they're amazing
because they support your back as well
with a 47 year old man I'm keep bouncing
away from the microphone which I'm sure
isn't good but yeah they're incredible
they keep you sitting straight they
accentuate your posture they do there
you go
so what's up man what are you doing in
town Florida's back chest out yeah they
would be proud there you go I'm here
yeah I'm hitting uh I'm here for a week
I've been I've got a show on Netflix has
to come out so I'm just kind of
generally here to talk about it I guess
and seen a couple of friends and it's
been a really nice very nice week yeah
this is a good way to end it too with a
giant fire that's just saying a giant
fuck get the fuck out it's people are
crazy living here there's no water it
never rains yeah it'll be it's very
different back home it'll be a yeah it's
it's it's it's amazing just at this time
of year leaving England and coming to
somewhere like I mean I'm sure I'm sure
you don't take it for granted but you
know it's it is amazing just for the
weather did you like LA as a like as a
place and a home and a does it I mean
you've got an amazing sort of setup here
is it just is it just a dream place to
you know it's uh it's a love-hate
relationship
certainly the the real problem is the
population is just so insane there's
more than 20 million people plus who
knows people you know how many they
really don't have no idea how many
people have snuck in you know it's it's
just a chaotic place there's no public
transport it just hit me there's no
trains there's no infrastructure of so
everyone's driving this huge yeah
everyone has an escalator a Tesla or
something yeah it's it's just a strange
place if there's the highways are
massive you know you know five six lanes
on each side and they're jammed solid or
nothing's moving either way and if you
can see it from there really
we realize how preposterous it is when
you're flying into LAX and you see the
405 highway in the distance and it's all
stopped for as long as you could see
miles in one way miles the other way
just complete parking lot
and just realize wow what are we doing
here
the finally spot with great mother and
you know and then the entertainment
industry draws people in hmmm I don't
know maybe it's better to be in England
keep the rain a little bit of a little
bit of dreary I do like a bit of the
older so I take a lot of pictures and
it's very nice like when the rain clears
and everything sort of glistens and
that's a nice yeah your Instagram is
interesting you know it's surprising all
right well yeah I mainly put I paint and
I do a lot of street photography so
those those I only got into Instagram
recently and I've just been putting
putting that stuff on there which I
don't know how interesting it is
generally but it's a nice place to put
that kind of stuff I paint like these
big portraits and they just end up
sitting around my house no one wants to
buy er no ones have been out by a giant
picture of my mother so I sell them so
they just sit around so actually my
mother just for clarity is your stuff is
really good thank you
Tom Waits one it's excellent it's
surprisingly good you know I mean you
think someone is really good at
something like magic and you say well
that's about as good as he's get it get
it sound like he's gonna be that good at
something else but you are yeah I mean
you're you're a really good artist thank
you very much have you done this your
whole life
not yet yeah pretty much like as a kid I
used to draw and paint a lot and always
faces like I'm you know get anything
else but faces has always been my thing
so I should if I could cut these kind of
you know caricatures and now I paint
more sort of straight pictures I guess
but it's nice if you do something that's
kind of you know public it's nice to do
something that's private
yeah it's that thing of something bigger
than yourself to throw yourself into and
to lose yourself you know it's days
weeks of you know just being in my
Studios is just it's lovely that's a
great thing
do you find that stuff like that clears
your mind for your other work I think
it's it's just the sheer contrast you
know one of my favorite parts the year
is touring and I get to do the shows in
the evening and then the days are free
and
like I'm not in London I'm in some other
city so no one no one can like get me in
for a meeting or anything I just have
the days free and I can write so I had a
book on happiness that I wrote which I
wrote while I was on tour and it was
just this amazing routine of just
finding a coffee shop spending the day
writing and then if that does get a bit
you know a bit boring or a bit you know
sad or something if it's not quite
coming together you've then you then get
to go out and be this amazingly
charismatic well rehearsed version of
yourself on stage which is you know full
of adrenaline and lovely so that that's
an amazing routine I think that's my
favorite favorite things here that the
painting and all that photography is an
interesting one because you you you find
yourself on the one hand kind of
slightly because I do street photography
so it's kind of you know out taking
pictures of candid moments I guess so
you're you're a step out of it but
you're also very open and engaged and
and that feels like a really prime state
that's said a very kind of porous lovely
state to be in and having been used to
keeping my head down out in public
because I realize I'm not known here at
all bit the UK I have a bit so if I I
was out in public I generally kind of
naturally could have hundreds a look
yeah hunker down and now it's the
opposite it's a totally changed that
relationship so that's good yes no it's
just photography just being out there
taking pictures yes it's just you're
having to you know mindful and open and
alert and at the same time so probably a
little bit shy having that little
step-back thing as well cos you you know
taking pictures is I find that a really
a really great state and it's a lovely
contrast to the the shows and the you
know the rest of it were you always shy
or did you become more shy because of
becoming really famous
I was always not always I thought I
think I grew quite that's probably quite
insecure as a kid I was very charming
and very quite bright and quite liked
socially you know that was that was all
good but I think like inside I was I was
very intimidated by the kind of sporty
kids you would have terrified me as a
child and I flatter kids like
just spoil yeah does that exactly as I
really didn't fit him with any of that
and sahabat when I first saw I might
like I started my career as a hypnotist
and I saw this guy performing at
University and I I just thought I'm
gonna I'm gonna do that I just I didn't
realize at the time all these boxes that
it was ticking you know performing that
sort of you know need for affirmation
and and and love and center of attention
and also the control aspect of it you
know the kind of you know the control
aspect and not also the kind of people
that particularly the sort of guys that
would respond well to hypnosis and come
up on stage and you know and respond
well to it tended to be exactly the kind
of guys that would have really
intimidated me before so that was light
at an unconscious level and I hope I've
grown out of that now mainly but yeah it
takes a lot of it takes a lot of boxes
so that that was that's how I started in
the I'm just definitely driven by
insecurity because eddies are any sort
of magic which sort of followed for me
on from the hypnosis you're basically it
is the quickest most fraudulent route of
impressing people that's you know the
subtext is only look at me aren't I
great which is not that interesting
after after a while so I've tried to
mean it as I as I've grown up I tried to
move it into a different area and one
that's a little more resonant than just
showing off that's fascinating that you
started out doing a hypnosis show us at
a comedy show no it was sort of I would
mainly perform it like colleges and I'd
do a demonstration and then have
questions and after questions and
answers afterwards and I wasn't making
people look stupid it was an
entertainment show and I guess it was
kind of you know funny but it was it was
it's just a really interesting thing and
yeah trouble with doing it on stages of
course it gets mixed up with people just
kind of playing along and stuff so it's
but if you take that out of it it's just
a really interesting area and I've done
this stuff for you know 20 years back
home I don't know I don't think of
myself as a hypnotist that was just kind
of where I started but the that the
suggestion based techniques of that is
something I've continued where then
brought into different areas and I still
don't fully understand it you know now
it's there's you can have a quiet climb
innocence you know inside someone's head
and know what they're experiencing
in there when I used to do these like
stage hypnosis shows the last thing I
did was to I'd tell these people on
stage that I was invisible right and I'd
I'd float something through the air
right like this bottle I've got here and
it's normally something bigger like a
chair and they'd be freaking out you
know running off stage and so on but
afterwards when I'd had this kind of Q&A
I'd um I'd ask them what would short
what was your actual experience like
like the show's over now be honest what
were you what were you experiencing and
you'd get some people that would say
well yeah you were obviously just
floating that you were just holding it
but I kind of felt like I had to play
along and then you'd get this
interesting error in the middle of of
like well I kind of right now on I think
that yes of course it was you but I it
was and I sort of knew it was you but I
emotionally just completely I could only
experience it as a terrifying floating
bottle or whatever it was so that's a
bit like an actor like getting caught up
in a role I guess like they know they
know they're on stage and it's a
character but nonetheless emotionally
committed and at the other extreme
people that would not accept that it was
me floating it just they that must have
been on a wire or something there's no
there's no way that I can drop you back
at the picture in my memory of that
thing so how do you know how do you how
do you judge what that experiences ones
and and are those people that are saying
no you were really invisible are they
just saying that because they want to be
like the best subjects and then in that
group I mean how do you tease it all
apart it's that is that is that that
must be a real issue right the people
that just want to please you and are
playing along can you tell if you were
yeah I can tell but I the way I use it
now is kind of I use it quite sort of
subtly in the show
I don't like overtly you know hypnotized
people so that means it can mean one of
two things either means it just I'm not
interested in people playing along
because I'm not just trying to create
the effect of someone hypnotized they
need to genuinely be responding to this
thing in order for the next bit to work
in which case I have to filter out
anybody playing along but occasionally
occasionally it doesn't matter like a
lot of the time like I'll get people up
on stage and I'll shake their hand and
there's a rapid handshake induction that
the guy did you know just falls to the
floor and there are times that that
matters and they have to be that has to
be a really honest response other times
I can tell there's sort of half into it
and they're just a bit intimidated and
but for the two thousand people looking
that might look it kind of might look
like the same thing and then it won't
matter how does that exactly does that
work
the handshake induction yeah well it's
it's a I take no responsibility for
explaining this to your tens of millions
of listeners and viewers but it's it's
you're you're interrupting a an
automatic process right this is the this
is the key to it was made popular by
made popular by I guess Richard Bandler
who's the guy behind NLP and so on I
don't know if he kind of created this
thing but perhaps perhaps Erikson did
before him I don't know anyway
you-you-you take an automatic process
and you interrupted in the middle so
like when you're shaking hands with
somebody that's a such a familiar
process that when you start you're not
thinking okay I'm going to grip this
person's hand now and I'm going to move
my hand up and down with them a few
times then I'll take my hand away you
just kind of do it automatically and
there's something about interrupting
that that leaves people really flummoxed
and the wilded because they're really it
really caught off guard like if you
imagine somebody comes up to you in the
street and says it's not half-past seven
you know your reaction isn't to go yeah
yeah I know it's 20 past nine your
reaction is a sort of you you think like
you've missed something like you're
trying to make sense of it it's a
strange kind of puts you on the back
foot and at that point if you if you've
got somebody who's fairly suggestible
and people coming up on stage it's such
an odd moment for them anyway they're
naturally very suggestible that a clear
instruction to sleep or whatever you
want to give them tends to be taken very
deeply and very often then you'll see I
don't shake hands and I'll break the
pattern of the handshakes well I'll
often take their hand and lift it up to
their face and say sleep and show them
their hand like that and they just sleep
and well it's not sleep but it's a kind
of it looks like I mean they they'll do
anything from eyes closed head drops
down to just drop like a like a dead
weight on the floor you know I found
this most interesting actually was like
applying this in slightly more useful
everyday situations was as a sort of
like a self-defense technique I was
walking between so I was like must have
been like 20 or something and I was at a
magic convention
and I was walking from one hotel to
another and I'm dressing like a
three-piece velvet suit as this skinny
British might as well have you know
punch me in the throat tattooed across
my face and this guy comes up and it's
like he's drunk it's about 3:00 in the
morning drunk aggressive is with his
girlfriend clearly looking for a fight
and he sort of he comes up to me and he
says what are you what are you fucking
looking at are you looking at and
because I'd spoken about this how to
deal with this sort of thing but had
never found myself in this situation I
kind of had it all mentally rehearsed so
I said to him I said the war outside my
house isn't 4 foot high and I guess
there's an equivalent of this with a
sort of adrenaline dump I think is
called in in martial arts but there's a
it's just like he's got all this
adrenaline and then a thing like that
from me which is just out of contact
like it makes sense I'm not like talking
gibberish it makes sense but it's just
out of context so now suddenly he's
thinking I've what I've missed something
so now he he was sort of you went what
and I said and the girlfriend walked off
and I said though the wall outside my
house isn't full for high I spent some
time in Spain the walls that were very
high but if you look at the ones here
that they're tiny that nothing and then
he just sort of broke down he what and
start crying well you know no wasn't
quite crying but it was just it was like
all the adrenaline and everything just
just flooded out of him and he sat down
and I end up sitting next to him on the
light you know on the roadside asking
him you know so what I was the plan was
I was going to try and stick his feet to
the floor and his whole family just kind
of collapsed and sat down yeah that was
because I knew it'd be like this highly
suggestible stay and either way the
moment of aggression and past but I
ended up ended up weirdly sitting with
him asking him what had happened that
evening and his girlfriend I think she'd
bottled somebody or something horrible
at her so he'd got out with all this
aggression but it's a good wasn't it if
you just have like um it could be just a
song lyric or just some some weird kind
of thing that you can just go into is in
those situations that I mean if
someone's running you in the knife it's
a bit difficult but you just you you're
kind of strangely taking control of a
situation otherwise what you're gonna do
if they say what are you looking at you
can't there's no way you can answer that
without being on the
back foot so it just kind of nicely kind
of inverts the situation and puts them
on the back for which anyway it worked
it was it was kind of fun isn't there
like a process required to hypnotize
someone you could just do it that way
and saying it didn't just talk them
through some sort of a program that
makes them think their foot is stuck to
the floor I it it all depends on the
moment I had I used to hypnotize people
in my in my room when I was a student
right so I was the guy that did hypnosis
what have people coming you know
regularly coming to try it out and I
this this one time I used to leave
people with like if they were responsive
to it and this was like I was really
early days just like you know 20 minutes
half an hour of relaxing somebody and
maybe suggesting this their hands were
getting light and floating or heavy and
they couldn't lift them so kind of you
know kind of basic stuff but I would
leave them if they were very suggestible
with the instruction that when you come
back if I click my fingers you'll go
back into the sleep state and they you
know they kind of get conditioned to
that and you know it'll often work even
like a week later and this guy came and
I thought I'd seen him before
I thought he'd been on a previous week
so he sat down and okay look at me and
sleep click my fingers and he went out
whatever that means right and then we
did whatever it was maybe you know
perhaps he wanted to stop smoking or his
hands floating in the air whatever it
wasn't at the end of it
I realized in talking today hadn't met
him before so then I'm like well how did
how did
why did you respond to me clicking my
fingers and cuz I don't have magic
fingers there's nothing like anything
going on here other than and I realized
it was just that it was just that moment
of my kind of confidence with it and the
fact
fortuitously that he was also very
suggestible and put those two things
together it that's what made it work it
was just that that psychological moment
for him that was more important than the
nature of the 20 minutes script that
I've been learning and using up to that
point so that was kind of a that was a
seminal so your confidence in that he
had already been under yeah I didn't
question it because I believed he had
and it just kind of it just sort of
happened and then he just if he hadn't
been a suggestible type then it probably
wouldn't have worked yeah but luckily he
was and that kind of really really
changed the way that I
that I you know thought about hypnosis
and also started this you know this
realization that ultimately my kind of
toolkit with what I do is is the stories
that people are telling themselves
that's that's kind of that's really you
know all there is even a magician
showing you a card trick is just getting
you to tell yourself a story edit edit
this event in such a way that you go oh
you know I picked a card and then it
disappeared it wasn't it was in my
pocket he never went near me and he read
it out all the bits that don't seem
important like when he complimented you
on your jacket earlier on in the day and
may have stuck a card in there or the
bit he took the card back for a moment
whatever because you don't you know
you're you're being sold a story with
particular sort of edit points and you
know to me that's interesting because
that's what was what life is you know we
have this infinite data source coming at
us and we can we just we have to kind of
reduce it to stories to make to make
sense so I think stripping aside all the
kind of vaudeville and tacky
associations of hypnotists and magicians
and so on I think there's something
there's something interesting at the
heart of it I think that that
storytelling capacity is endlessly
fascinating to me well it's fascinating
in that regard but it's also fascinating
that it's seen there seems to be like
some cheat code to the human mind like
there's a there's a way you can like
lock into like an admin panel and all
the sudden you're you're doing things
like telling people they don't really
don't want to be smoking or putting them
into this hypnotic mindset by just
snapping your fingers and saying sleep
like it's I don't think I don't think it
is that I think it looks like that and
that's a problem because it look it it's
you so often see it when performers are
doing it and they're often going for a
kind of theatrical effect if you go and
look at it like a clinical environment
where hypnosis is being investigated it
isn't like that at all it's much more
kind of boring in a way doesn't it
doesn't have any theater attached to it
it's much more on you know kind of
intuitively understandable have like
been hypnotized or so I'm terrible I'm a
really bad really bad subject I had one
experience where I only one when I was
in like a workshop thing that I was
there is a like a you know
paying person I wasn't giving the
workshop and I was sat with the exercise
was it really worked for me it may work
for others so you split into pairs and
the idea is you start to describe a
scene so you sat on a set with this
woman you close your eyes you start to
describe a scene and you go back and
forth adding details right so she says I
have a cam laying on a beach and I'm so
I just imagine that like okay hang on a
beach and I can I can feel the warmth of
the Sun on my face I'm just kind of like
imagining it and joining in with the
story and then I just remember somebody
going okay guys time up time for lunch
and I I had been on a B I had beat on a
beach and I'd completely just I'd been
there like a dream it was completely
real at some point it tipped into that
that's the only experience I've had of
it other than that I don't respond to
I'm just not I think it's just it's just
suggestibility it's something about and
we get it when you know we get it when a
doctor gives us a placebo and we respond
to that because this authority figure is
giving us that or or the way we absorb
opinions of people that we admire and
experts that we admire how we just more
easily take those on board
unquestioningly this is all the same
thing it's just suggestion the trouble
is is it most the time it's done through
the world of the performing hypnotist
which isn't isn't giving really very
clear and fair view of what's going on
because it's so theatrical and so yeah
often you you know you're you're
relishing in things like I clicked my
fingers in the sky went to sleep yeah
but that's not really you know the what
are they doing their car are they just I
think just kind of responding cuz you've
just asked them to and you they know
that when you click their fingers
they're supposed to go to sleep is
there's a real range of possible
experiences that you might look like a
power but it doesn't mean it is they
might just be just complying yeah I
don't I was going to do some of this
stuff on stage without using the
hypnosis to show that there's I don't
think there's anything that happens
under hypnosis that can't be done
without and I was having this discussion
with my friend Andy who directs and
co-writes my stage shows with me and I
was saying like that thing of you know
when you when a hypnotist gets someone
to eat an onion
and says you know this is a classic
hypnotic stunt gives them the raw onion
and says it's a delicious juicy Apple
now we sit and enjoy and you get
somebody
munching into an onion and like having
no problem eating it I'm sure that feels
like if you're just gonna pull it off
without hypnosis what that just happen
anyway and and he said I bet I bet you
can just do it anyway and II went to my
fridge took out an onion took a big bite
of it and it was fine because he's
pretty right so he's proving a point
there right so he's in a different
mental state than somebody going got a
day to take a bite of that onion when
suddenly I like you're pre-empting the
you know the disgust and all the reasons
not to do it but the fact that he was
just going I bet you can do it and
trying to prove a point men you did it
and it was fine so that that was a
different mental state and it worked oh
that wasn't hypnosis but the end result
still if you did that on stage and
pretended to hypnotize somebody first it
would look like you've done something
amazing so I don't know is it it's it's
to me it's just it's just that story
that someone's telling themselves what
didn't it did it taste like an onion to
him reduce yes now it just it's just it
would have no no no it would have tasted
like an onion oh there was no situation
what about people that are hypnotized
does it taste like an apple to them well
I don't know it's like invisible what
about what are they seeing I think for
some of them it will you know taste and
pain and things like that and discomfort
it's all very subjective but the end
result of doing this thing that looks
like it couldn't happen without some
magical process that's the key and none
of these things really demand that met
even when even when you look at people
being undergoing surgery through
hypnosis and being wide awake and being
cut open so you think well that must be
evidence the hypnosis is some special
thing because that couldn't happen
otherwise but it of course it can you
know the layer of skin that feels pain
is actually sort of quite thin so once
you get through that when you're moving
organs around that's not that's not a
painful process anyway plus very funny
tend to use a bit a little bit of like a
local anesthetic anyway just to numb the
very top layer of skin so again what
looks amazing very often isn't it's a
it's an endlessly rich and bizarre area
to me and I kind of as I said I don't
really think of myself as a him it is
but the that process that kind of
ability for people to get into this
space where they can have that kind of
experience is it's something I you know
I'll always find interesting the one of
the recent stage shows I did
it's called miracle I don't if you've
seen it but I'm faith healing in the
second half so using exactly the same
idea and I've I've got an audience that
are like me you know they don't believe
in that I'm saying look I mean I'm an
atheist I don't believe in this either
but will you just kind of go with me on
least at the start because the results
are are really interesting and I I just
started doing this this faith Enoch not
really knowing if it was going to work I
thought I can get some adrenaline going
and I I know could see the techniques
that the the charlatans faith healers
were using and I thought well I'll just
you know I'll do that and I thought well
the adrenaline kills pain so if I can
get some adrenaline going there's bound
to be people that said oh no I had a
pain in my back and now it's gone but
the actual results admittedly with like
small percentages of the audience right
not everybody but the people that were
coming up and saying I had this problem
and now it's gone and there were there
was a woman that had a she's been
paralyzed down one side of her body
since a kid she's like in her forties
now she's in floods of tears going I
could move my arm and this was this is a
skeptical audience like me that know
that there's kind of playing along with
something and nonetheless again small
percentage not not not everybody about
having having these kind of experiences
it is so that's less a psychological
component of suffering which yeah which
is which was really eye-opening doing
that show night after night after night
well faith healing is gonna be a form of
hypnosis right yeah it's all this
exactly it's the same world it's plain
that they both well they're both joined
by is is the idea of suggestibility and
it doesn't and sometimes those healings
are sort of I mean if you take an x-ray
before and afterwards nothing's changing
but in as much as a lot can depend on
this psychological component it can
can't really make a difference to get as
the percentages are getting smaller so
three thousand people in the audience
three hundred people come up ten people
come up on stage and I'm you know
involving them in the show but getting
even smaller there are people that like
a year later were getting in touch and
say just so you know
that thing did actually clear like it
hasn't come back because I thought it
would only last for 10 minutes while
they're on stage and then yeah which is
why you don't tell people to throw their
pills away and so on right but hey we're
in probably like that half a percent now
which is always going to be kind of
pretty extraordinary but it was like a
real a real thing so and what still if
you had two hundred people and one of
them actually isn't cured from that
mm-hmm that is immensely bizarre it's
immensely bizarre but it's it's bizarre
and and like I had this a bad shoulder
for a long time and I I got really used
to when I put a jacket on kind of
putting this in my left arm putting it
in like letting my left arm go dead and
then using my right arm to pull the
thing up right now I don't know how much
I really need to do that anymore or
whether I'm just doing it out of habit
but if somebody got me up on stage and
said your left shoulder is healed it's
happened now
and kind of made me feel a bit booked
now go on try it try and move you move
your arm I think in the surprise of it
and the sheer kind of just snapping out
of that habit of being like this is my
dead arm I probably would be very
surprised that I can actually move it as
much as I can you know it's just it's
like when you break it down it's like
not that amazing but when you when you
would you see the the the more kind of
extreme and exciting ends of that it's
is mind-blowing and then you realize how
these performers how you start to go mad
yourself and think well I've got this
special gift and mmm I could pack out
stadia doing like I did think of one
point why don't I do like a secular
healing show I can say well this is it's
just you know it doesn't work on
everybody and it may only work for ten
minutes but it certainly works in some
meaning of the world anyway I didn't do
that but you know you can start to go
mad well the processes of the mind I
mean that the idea of the placebo effect
is fascinating the idea that your mind
has some ability that you can't tap into
consciously but you can in some sort of
a subconscious sense someone gives you
something and if you're convinced that
it's doing something positive it
actually will have some benefit to you a
real tangible measurable benefit and it
doesn't seem to make sense there's
there's no mechanism that we can trace
there's no mechanism no it
well what I found works really well is
I've done a few shows on recibo is for
me I find the key is the person gets to
absolve any responsibility for the
change themselves so they've done a
couple of things where this new show I
have on Netflix now called sacrifice a
guy thinks he's got a microchip
implanted in him which is doing all the
work another show I've done is was
placebo injections they were getting so
they filled in the drug is doing the
work but the key is they don't have to
think they don't think they're doing any
work at all this thing is taking care of
that for me
and that's really powerful because
suddenly it's it's the thing about I
don't have to do it I don't the person
thinking I don't have to make this
happen myself there was no onus on me I
don't have to do any anything this this
magic formula is somehow doing it is
hugely powerful so that yeah that's
that's that's a I think that's a big a
big part of it which is why a lot of the
when we were me when we did the placebo
program we created this whole like fake
pharmacological building we had a
building we just you know kick fitted it
out with actors and equipment and stuff
to just create this environment that was
going to be convincing before the
injections were even given these Ron
people that had various like fears or
problems or things that were just going
to just investigate and see how well the
placebo worked and yeah it did but
that's a helpful thing I'm feeling
there's just something in your making it
making it happen yeah almost like a
subconscious optimism or something like
that yeah I've wondered if that sort of
mindset that allows you to experience a
beneficial result of a placebo if that
in some way transfers over to everyday
life events if having this maybe
unfounded sense of optimism or this
bizarrely positive outlook or this
almost undue confidence actually can
have some sort of a beneficial tangible
result in the real world in terms of
actual events that take place whether
it's because of the way you interact
with other human beings
they are being influenced by your
positive a dirty attitude and energy and
confidence and enthusiasm and then
therefore things go smoother or whether
it's really some sort of a factor of the
way you interchange with reality itself
and that your attitude actually has an
effect on events I think it gets vastly
overrated I'm a big advocate of
strategic pessimism
I think the the problem with that kind
of the problem with unwavering self
belief yes is that it just doesn't that
doesn't quite map into how life works
right I think I think the Greek said
this down so if you imagine a kind of a
graph so you've got your your is it the
y-axis going up here of your aims and
things you want to achieve and then your
x-axis is just what these to call
fortunes stuff that life throws back at
you that you have no control over no
control at all so we are told a lot
nowadays that you just you know set your
goals believe in yourself visualize this
and as if we can crank up the sort of
the line that we're living yes right up
in line with our goals and our you know
aims and so on the reality is there's
always life like pushing back yeah so
actually what we lead is that x equals y
line that that's a kind of more
realistic I think a praising of what our
life is so actually kind of sort of I
think making peace with that which
allows for all the optimism you want but
also makes peace with the fact that at
some point that might let you down you
know you can spend your life climbing a
ladder and then realize you had it
against the wrong wall to quote Joseph
Campbell you know you can set goals that
they may just be the wrong goals and all
you may achieve them and then like you
know now on I've got you know a friend
who spent a long time building up a
company and selling and he's been driven
to do this all his life because he like
needed to sort of achieve to feel like
you know that he was kind of really
worth something that was he was all
about achievement and then he you know
sells the company and achieves that
dream and then he didn't ought to do
with his life because that urge was
still there now it had nowhere to go and
actually ended up in there
because of it it was such a strangely
counterintuitive thing so I you know I'm
all about changing the world for the
better but I think we have to make
mental space for the fact that you know
I went when Freud created psychoanalysis
he wasn't trying to make people happy he
called it
he caught it restoring restoring natural
unhappiness like you know life is
basically gonna be unhappy sometimes and
he was trying to get rid of unnatural
unhappiness is he sorry like I said of
neurotic unhappiness and restore a kind
of an easy relationship to life and
fortune so to me that's that's the case
I'm always a bit was a bit skeptical of
the kind of just unwavering positivity
yeah
no I agree with you I mean I think that
unwavering positivity is usually
delusional yeah but a certain amount of
positivity I schools okay of course a
certain amount a certain amount of the
dangers it's like it's like it's like
the faith healers right so the faith
healing thing of you go away you don't
take your pills and if this condition
returns which it's going to it's your
own fault because you didn't have enough
faith right now that's of quite a toxic
cycle of self blame it's exactly the
same cycle that you get when you read
like the secret for example yes it's
quite explicitly if these great things
don't come your way it's because your
self belief wavered for a second you
only have yourself to blame she's very
explicit about that and that that's the
problem it's it it's great if you can
put it in a certain context if not it's
sadly can be a recipe I think for
anxiety you know just a feeling of
failure that you don't understand where
it's come from
well what I was trying to get out was a
wonder if it's a component in a much
larger picture not that it's the one
thing like the key like the real problem
with the secret is the the idea that
you're taking all these people with us
that are already successful they've
achieved a certain result and then
you're asking them how did you achieve
that result well I thought positive and
I just really put my mind to it and I
dreamt on it they all have this in
common yes well you know who also
thought positive a bunch of losers you
know they tried and you know they got
hit in the head by asteroids or car
accidents or the world turned bad on
them I mean that actually can happen too
yeah so it's just you're using you have
a biased focus-group executive is
exactly it's exactly and and the the
idea of setting a goal fixating on it
and ignoring all the haters and ignoring
all the people that will bring you down
is a perfect recipe for failure as much
as it's a common anecdotal story of
success well the problem with that is if
you just focus on the one thing about
human beings I think is that we really
do need other people's input and
interaction the idea that you're gonna
work in a vacuum and create this great
masterpiece without any interaction with
other human beings that's that doesn't
really it doesn't really work like that
it doesn't because life is active and
messy and ambiguous and ambivalent and I
think the trouble is we get hung up on
nouns like happiness or meaning or even
the self right because I think I think
actually these things are verbs they're
maybe we selves as a verb you know maybe
it's something that happens dynamically
in the relationships that were in maybe
our self is something that kind of
extends out into the world and is you
know kind of fluid in that way and
happiness maybe it's maybe that's an
activity meaning is maybe an activity
but we we reduced these things to nouns
like they're really neat easy isolated
things and they're really not so I can
there in the a lot of the TV shows that
I do I'm putting people through like a
transformative process and they they're
reacting to kind of really extreme
situations and I always have people
saying oh I wouldn't do that I love they
but think it's all fakers I would never
do that but they're viewing themselves
as this isolated it's just this sort of
individual kind of separated from
everything else watching that and
thinking how they behave what they're
not doing is thinking and if I were in
that situation when those same pressures
yes what then that's that's amazing that
that does change us that we're not these
you know four to three hundred years
we've had this idea that we are these
kind of it all goes back to like not
being influenced by kings and priests
like it was this is John Locke it's like
the the beginnings of that that idea
that no no we we should not we should
have this kind of personal authority and
it's drifted into
through count I think it's drifted into
a really unrealistic and unfair sense of
how isolated we are we're not we clearly
social creatures I do that there's a
show on Netflix called the push which I
did which was to see whether if you
create this environment of social
compliance so it's a big party right
there's one guy and it doesn't know that
this is being filmed that is part of a
TV show everybody else is an actor and
the plot was to see could you get him to
murder somebody to push someone off the
roof to their death as far as he's
concerned obviously it doesn't no one
really dies right right and it just
starts with he kind of gets roped into
helping out at this event and it's a big
high stakes event everyone's in you know
tuxedos but he didn't get the memo for
the dress codes we already comes in
feeling a bit and then he gets he gets
roped into helping out and like the
first thing is asked to do is to label
them meat-filled sausage rolls snacks as
vegetarian right because they the
vegetarian ones haven't been delivered
so just like a little kind of foot in
the door thing and it just builds and it
builds and it gets at this point when
he's on a roof having been through this
really dark extraordinary and sort of
hilarious and massively anxiety juicing
journeys a lot of emotions you go
through and you watch it and then faced
with this massive pressure to kill this
guy and I don't know don't want to spoil
the ending is it's a stonker but um this
is like it's that's what it's all about
you know how your how your sense of it's
like the story you tell yourself about
who you are it just isn't isn't isn't
real I talked about then you should talk
about net out the sacrifice because
there's anything you want but can I ask
you one about this what cut do you feel
a certain sense of moral confusion when
you're trying to talk someone into
potentially and you realize that if this
wasn't a show yeah if similar or maybe
even more powerful pressures were in
play and this guy was suggestible and he
found himself in very unusual
circumstances where it seemed like a
good idea to kill this person like
you're you're introducing this thought
and this this scenario into a person's
mind
that perhaps could go cradle to the
grave and never have that it's it's cut
of the opposite but it actually it is
hard to both I'm really giving away the
ending but the what it does is actually
mentally rehearse somebody what what
this guy took away from it is the
knowledge that if he was ever in a
situation again where there was anything
like that nature of compliance that he
now has the tools to just like stand up
to because you need that kind of
emotional rehearsing and likewise for
viewers hopefully watching it too that's
kind of the idea you're all we're all
emotionally rehearsing it with him and
unless you've been trained in stuff and
you know it like that you you need like
an emotional experience of it to know
right when that thing happens to just
have the resources to understand that
you can be manipulative these are very
although it does I realize it doesn't
sound like it and that show the purchase
I mean it's kind of like the darkest of
all the shows but they are they are
there for a like a good reason there's
like a there's a reason for doing it
everybody that comes away as always like
you know that's that's that is that was
a great thing to do best thing I've ever
done you know these kind the journeys
themselves look do look very dark well
he sounds like the guy who had a
positive outlook on it sounds like a
person who it can learn from their
mistakes yeah but there's some people
that when confronted with some new
situation like wow I really was gonna
push that guy off the roof like this is
me like I didn't think that was me now I
know now I know that I'm capable of
doing that if I get manipulated to the
point like wow and then they have a lot
of like real confusion and and and
perhaps lack of faith in themselves and
their abilities decision that's kind of
that's kind of my job to make sure that
they don't fray mning and their yeah
that's kind of you know I mean that I
get these are ethical questions that are
worth asking like ultimately my concern
with these I've done a lot of these
shows where people are put through these
dark journeys to reach a valuable point
more valuable than perhaps the end of
the push which is quite dark but I'm the
my my only real concern is their
experience so the guy that has just done
this new show for example I said to me
before I came out and started talking
about the show I said what do you want
me to say about your experience
he said aside from having my kids that
is the best thing I've ever done
but I know other people watching the
show will say how can you know can you
justify that you're manipulating
somebody and and why did you not just
want to kill you at the end of it and
and but that the reality is it's just
this one guy's experience that I care
about and that's something that I can
manage and create and make sure that
he's left in the right way and also
these are people I just like will remain
friends with for the rest of my life so
it's not like great you've done the TV
show thank you goodbye this is no
there's a genuine intimate bond yeah
well we all like we all end up falling
in love a bit like me and the production
team falling in love with these people
you putting them through this is like
ten month projects mmm half that little
different with them sacrifice because he
he thought he was taking part in one
show which was a documentary when
actually there was this whole other
thing going on but a lot of the time
they had no idea how long was pushed for
it what push was well that was only like
it that was a was only like one evening
of actual filming Wow
because it was just one like real time
event mmm
but the preparation for it you know goes
back a bit I did a the biggest one was I
did a show called
apocalypse which isn't on Netflix I mean
if you go down the rabbit hole it'll be
somewhere on YouTube where we ended the
world for somebody so we we took control
of his newsfeed his TV we filmed like
special editions and TV shows like new
shows that have watched fed them into
his team
oh no drip by drip created the idea of
the world was gonna way and there was
going to be this meteor strike even like
he'd be out in a cafe and the radio and
the calf because we'd know he'd be in
that cafe that's a radio playing with
DJs that he knows that are talking about
this thing that is supposed to have him
wrong way and then we staged it we
staged this pyrotechnic end-of-the-world
thing and this kind of sort of
controlled enough environment we could
get him into where we could stage that
convincingly and then he wakes up in the
second sort of episodes a two-episode
thing in this post-apocalyptic seemingly
like weeks later in a hospital I every
one's gone the place is abandoned some
infection has spread so there is like
this is Omri plot and he then lives
through the plot of The Wizard of Oz to
find his way back home and the point of
it was this stoic idea of valuing what
you have because this was somebody who
by all reports was you know lazy selfish
took advantage of his parents who was
living with never had a
Robert Jovi was just kind of like needed
to value what he had said the Stoics
would say you know just rehearse taking
everything away so when you return to
the stuff you have you value that rather
than just always desiring more so that
was that idea kind of writ large take
everything away and the world but again
like he was transformed by it really
changes you're still in touch with this
person
yeah absolutely yeah and so it's just
this is a permanent shift permanent
shift he ended up being a teacher in a
special-needs school that he's married
that's crazy I know that I can take
credit for all of that but you know it
was definitely a big part of that
well near-death experiences are often
incredibly beneficial to people they
make big giant shifts in their attitude
and their perception of the world and
they realized that time really is finite
and then it could have been taken away
from them and they feel like they have a
new lease on life
I mean you really can become a totally
different person after something like I
think so well that's what's happened
with this guy Phil so in the in the in
this new show which is also the first
like brand new thing I've done for
Netflix there's a couple of other shows
and what is it called it's called
sacrifice sacrifice so the plot is I
take this guy Phil who is an American
guy and his father's as father this
British got a few sort of British links
but he's an American guy living in
Florida Cocoa Beach Florida
big right wing guy strong views against
immigration and I using these covert
psychological techniques try and get him
to the point where he will willingly lay
down his life and take a bullet for an
illegal Mexican immigrant orally
somebody believes is you know it's an
actor because the whole thing this whole
thing with actors so so he went through
this journey which is not AB it's not a
political story at all I mean I would
see it kind of ie it resonates but it
was ultimately a story about compassion
and and humanity in this ultimately very
human moment that he that he found
himself in and you know the guys like
made a huge difference to him you know
it's it's so this is I don't know kind
of don't give away exactly how in terms
of the process take there's about ten
months for him my him it was like maybe
three four months it was like the
beginning block of this
but there's like two levels to making
these shows you've got a right the IP
know that this is the plot of the show
and find out and make that happen for
him but you've also got a crate this the
whole thing has its like this countryman
show it all are you creating a fiction
for somebody that has to be completely
convincing there's a whole other level
of of kind of work plus you know you've
got to make sure this guy's robust
enough to go through something like that
says a whole vetting procedure that has
to happen without him realizing what
it's all about that's a great way of
putting it robust and robust
psychologically right yeah yeah that is
a crazy amount of preparation and
production work is here yeah it's it's
it's huge in the apocalypse show that
was like one moment when we had to just
make this guy's because there was the
idea of there was electrical
interference with the meteors just had
to make his TV pop off in his room like
just sort of you know cut out and to do
that there were two guys out in his
garden shed waiting who had to be there
all day because they couldn't come in
out the garden because he might see them
pulling a cable at this moment to make
the TV go but then they couldn't leave
because he might see them so they had to
spend the night in this garden shed and
this is like after three months of not
having a day off as well so that's like
a nothing moment the normal never
remember from the show but yeah a huge
amount of huge amount of work I always
get people saying oh it's all fake you
haven't really done it I think it's just
this they won't believes you'd actually
go to all that trouble for the paranoid
like if you if you did that to a
naturally paranoid person or a person
with a touch of schizophrenia
oh my which is why they have to be
vetted very very carefully and at any
point during the process of course we
can like stop it like yeah you know I
can but that would suck wouldn't it that
would suck you see you guys starting to
question reality and look at clouds in
an odd way you know oh boy I think I
think he's slipping away yes yeah that's
never happened it's always been it's
always been usually yeah it's an amazing
process though I mean it's it's that's
amazing how much prep work is involved
in something like that
it's just setup the radio where they
walk into a different news broadcast
I mean it's that's fun the tempos
terrifying bit was the it was the for
him was the kind of an end-of-the-world
moment because we had this fake fake
radio broadcast from from the BBC you
know she's so convincing
Wow major Bludd go can't more of worlds
type stuff but in this like in this
thing in in sacrifice there was like a
amazing pivotal moment in it when he we
do this staring test which was developed
by New York psychology professor and the
idea was you you just you might have
come across it you just stare silently
into someone's eyes for four minutes and
it's it's the most amazing thing because
obviously the first thing is you get
this is walk woodenness and this kind of
you know giggling and and then that
tends to stop and then you're just
facing a human being and like you've
sort of somehow broken through all the
kind of crap and then you just see like
a person that's like living and
struggling like you are and someone with
a private life that like that's a big
thing for me like you know we we we go
through life seeing people generally
generally at their best like you know
generally people will present their best
version of themselves to you if you have
a couple over for dinner you'll tend to
see that couple at their best so you
have this skewed idea of how together
other people are how impressive other
people are how great other couples are
compared to how you are with your
partner and we miss that like because we
know for us we have this big clumsy
embarrassing lumbering giant of a
private life that's just following us
around and it's particularly now you
know Instagram and all that people are
branding themselves so I mean it's like
it's so unfair in terms of the
difference between how you perceive
yourself and how you perceive everybody
else so again you know there's the the
the stories that we're kind of living
out so they're you know it takes like
four minutes of this bizarre staring
thing to kind of reach a moment of just
suddenly I think hitting a point of just
seeing another human being and
everything that comes with that it was a
big moment for this guy Phil going
through it was a really we tried a
couple of things within but you see in
the show don't don't work out quite well
and then and then this really am a
motional moment when he he just has this
you know big change yeah it's I think
also just being out to do a TV show that
really like changes somebody called
quite aside from how popular the show is
or how well it works as a show or who
watches it whatever just to actually
feel like you know at some point in my
life I've done a positive thing just for
one person with TV which is like you
know generally kind of a pretty moronic
kind of medium so to be able to just do
something meaningful is you know is it's
good
listen it's it sounds amazing it doesn't
just sound good it sounds like quite a
work of art that you've managed to
figure out a way to coordinate all these
moving parts and trick someone into
accepting a bunch of different versions
of reality that you're presenting yeah
get these results it's it well it's I've
got a big production crew that work you
know it's not all of me I've got to
write the thing and you know you design
it and so on that but the we kind of
worked on it over the years we had like
little things that involved involve
those kind of plots like that was the
first show I did like that was taking a
guy who about as with fill and sacrifice
out just bringing out someone's hero
right that's really what it's about
that's kind of the story you're seeing
somebody go through a big change but
bringing out the hero and the the first
time he did like that involve this guy
who at the end of this his own like
journey had been through finds himself
on an aeroplane he's terrified of flying
but he you know we create this situation
where he had to be on a flight and he
didn't know has anything to do with us
everyone's an actor in the plane we've
got hidden cameras throughout the plane
then there's this medal there is a
medical emergency and will somebody land
the plane someone needs to land
what do you step up and do it it's
called hero at 30,000 feet oh Jesus
I just just to talk through the ending
cuz like it's not right it's kind of a
spoiler but it doesn't matter he does it
right he rises up has this moment he
goes to the cockpit now he is highly
suggestible right I've used him because
he's suggestible so I know that I can
put him to sleep in inverted commas by
clicking my fingers right he's
conditioned to that yeah so I step out
before he enters the cockpit click my
fingers he sort of zonk's out he's got
very conditioned to this throughout the
process
stick him in a wheelchair we land the
plane he wakes up in a about to walk
into one of those convincing simulators
you know that they use
for pilot training and it's kind of a
night flight so that was that we found
out that was the most convincing thing
was to have it when it's dark so he now
goes in believing he's in the real
cockpit of a real plane 30 feet at
30,000 feet up in the air
he's got the guy on ground control who
is you know in on it obviously as
everybody is talking him down getting
him to land the plane and he just it's
just amazing this guy this guy as in his
mind you know is his landing this plane
saving the lives of 300 people and then
he steps out and then the thing is
revealed to him and it's so emotional
and then there's a you know the game you
know Michael Douglas film you know
that's that so this has always been a
point of reference to me so he comes out
there's like a big party of everyone
that's been on his journey all these
people these actors that have been you
know taking it in this direction yeah
somebody it's why I've over the years
kind of work with these kind of these
plots these kind of immersive Truman
show style plots while at the same time
doing stage shows I don't you know I do
a live show every year as well which is
kind of a bit more like an old-fashioned
sort of magic mind-reading kind of kind
of show but yeah they are they are these
you know these extraordinary journeys
but I just do like maybe one a year
because they take you know they just
take so it seems like not only does it
take too much time but it also relies so
heavily on the improvisational abilities
of all these other people the ability to
adjust and act normal yeah and and to be
convincing yeah and to follow the plot
and not deviate at all and the LA actors
we use for sacrifice were so good it's
just like it's just like in your blood
over here you're ever so it was so good
and they were like big we're at the end
they're like big sort of aggressive
racist biker characters that we use
terrifying and yeah which is their that
hilarious thing of like they are because
they were bikers as well so they are big
like hairy intimidating people but at
the same time they want to know about
their motivation and whether they did a
right in this thing oh yeah odd
combination Wow
what a fantastic idea for a show and so
uniquely original I mean it's it just
seems like there's so much work involved
in something like this you must obsess
over that I the process is I
come up with an idea so like let's which
is normally we normally sit I sit with a
couple of guys that are like the shows
with we normally drive ourselves mad
thinking of ideas and then one of us
normally me goes I can't we just let's
just end the world and it's zombies or
let's citizen we can get someone to push
a ball off a building or with this one
because I'd done the push I wanted to
kind of do the opposite of it something
that'd be saving a life a much more
redemptive story than the push so that
idea is the first thing and I try and
combine a really strong dramatic hook
with a really good reason for doing it
otherwise you're just making like a
controversial shocking thing for the Sun
right which is no interest so well
that's a beautiful perspective to that
you actually want to benefit someone
through this crazy prank you're playing
on them yeah yeah otherwise exactly it
would just be a crazy horrible yeah
there is like part of the enjoyment of
the show I guess is a little bit of that
it's kind of fun a little bit but that's
that's there you know the shows I think
they have a lot of heart and a lot of
them thought what you're intended to be
beneficial to these people it's what
transforms it you have empathy for these
folks yeah and you you you truly care
that that alone makes everything else
better
it makes the whole like if the whole
thing is just like I'm smarter than
these dummies and I'm just gonna trick
them I mean we've had that show before
many many times and make people feel
terrible and it's cringe-inducing when
you watch and you can't look away but
that you're doing this and the end
result is actually benefits their
perspective and actually might change
their life for the better that's
extraordinary that's amazing thank you
well that's that's that's the hope the
way that I do it the way that I change
them is through conditioning so I and
this is a technique I've used a lot over
the years of you kind of take the
emotional state you want the person to
have at the end break it down into
components and then attach each one of
those to it to a trigger so this guy
fill-in sacrifices using I can app which
he thinks is sort of talking to this the
microchip he hasn't him because he
thinks things with him
really do like cut him open and
seemingly yeah we just don't you know
it's a placebo we don't really put it in
but now you actually do cut him yeah we
cut him up yeah I don't think he needs
don't need stitches for it's a kind of
kind of a small car but it's a scalpel
going in horrible so he thinks he's
using this app which is kind of helping
motivate him but what it's doing it's
at-at it's giving him this sound like
this little jingle that gets attached to
all those feelings of motivation so that
means that when he finds himself in this
kind of final scene where he has this
choice to step in and save a life
that we could have the same jingle on
the radio that plays and you know it's
like that thing of you hear a song and
you're breaking up with someone and it's
a horrible period of your life and then
five years later you hear the same song
and it just brings it all back
yeah is that at that process or
obviously like you know advertising it's
the big example of that isn't that the
premise behind something like The
Manchurian Candidate there's some way
they can snap and then you go back to
this yeah that's more kind of I guess
overtly that's like a posthypnotic
suggestion this isn't this is more
gentle because he needed to make the
decision himself the idea was not that
it'd be some kind of hypnotized robot if
that would even work anyway you know
this is this is about a creating a
trigger for this feelings of empathy are
important a lot of the show's about
everything and a lot the shows about the
desire to act and then he's he finds
himself in this situation which is
extreme he has no idea at this point
it's anything to do with that the
filming is finished that will happen in
England as far as you're concerned he's
gone back home had time to forget all
about it and then ends up stranded in
this situation where it all happens and
then I trigger these things off so I'm
giving in this kind of psychological
nudge and then it's you know what what
will happen will he will he will he rise
up and take it like like the guy landing
the plane it's kind of like what what
what ultimately you know it's that guy's
decision and it's also I think it's a
story about stepping out of the kind of
the you know that the I guess the show
resonates politically but it's not a
political show that the there's like
there are political narratives we get
constrained by and we forget that
actually it's the dialogue between the
sides that you know where humanity
emerges and where we find
truth so this is also I guess a story
about a guy coming out of his particular
socio-political narrative and just
finding something that ultimately is
just a human you know a human quality
kindness compassion and these are not
political qualities although they end up
getting politicized but you know they're
not they're not I think that a lot of
people are gonna watch this and want
that to happen to them like I need some
sort of a transformative prank played on
me because I think people dude we do get
caught in ruts right we do get stuck on
momentum we get stuck following the same
patterns over and over again it's very
difficult to change your life this is
this is it this is it well but the thing
that makes us so great at evolving our
ability to adapt is the same thing that
just it ties us down so like all through
life so from an early age like we emerge
in this world and we're very quickly
given messages about what are relations
for that ship to that world is this is
what people are like this is what
they'll want from you you are not
powerful the world is powerful you know
and that that is it's going to be skewed
Jung said that you know the I love this
that the greatest burden a child has to
bear is the unlived life of its parents
such a great things your starting point
is this skewed story yeah and then you
just you go through life looking for
things that just fit and recreate those
those patterns because they feel so
comfortable you know you're what you
learn about love from your parents you
start to bring to your adult
relationships and project all that stuff
on on your partner if you think about
you know that that if you've had a nice
loving upbringing you are getting a
ridiculously skewed version of what love
means that we know as adults how
difficult it is raising kids we never
saw that as kids we never saw our
parents going off and screaming each
other in the next room once we've gone
to bed we just have this sort of
impossibly hopefully you know if we've
had a had a happy one we get this
impossible template of what love is it
should be and then we just dump that on
our poor adult partners which nobody can
live up to so our ability to adapt to
internalize stories about who we are and
then like mistake that for reality he's
just
is just what makes living just difficult
and complex and also the narratives that
come through fiction narratives from
films and books and yeah songs the the
versions of romance and yes Patera yeah
I love the idea that don't if you know
Alain de Botton is a British philosopher
and writer and he said you know if you
if you go to bed twice a week with your
partner thinking the fuck am I doing
with this person that's normal right
that's a normal thing I like to me
that's more useful information than you
know how to make your relationship
perfect right these things aren't
perfect and again living living with the
understanding that you know life is what
about three times a week three times a
week I think that's probably pretty
normal as well what's the number where
you should start to realize I've two
good nights we have two good nights
though five nights a hell with two of
them yeah she's the best yeah what do
you do what do you do yeah I think the
Vanaras that we get from fiction or and
they're very confusing to people you
know particularly people that are very
romantic they have these ideas that
their life is going to be like one of
their favorite films and that's what
they're looking for they're holding out
you know they're holding out for when
the music plays and the close-up is
there and and those stories stop going
out to this guy and a baton you read a
lovely book on this those fit the
trouble with those films of those
stories they stop when the people fall
in love and get together yeah that's but
that's when it starts that's when the
tough stuff starts that we can do with
some good strong fictional frameworks do
you know absorb that that's when the
tough start it's like it's like death is
the same thing as n't it we have no
we've kind of lost touch with the
cultural narratives around death that
gave it some meaning so now when it
happens it's just this absurd scary
thing that we don't know what to do with
the only narrative we have that we have
absorbed I guess is that of the the
brave battle that someone's fighting
which is so unhelpful for the person
that's in that situation makes everyone
else maybe feel better but just adds
like eventual failure and letting
everyone else down to this person's
burns it was what they should what they
should what we should feel in that at
that
time is you know that this is this is
when we can bring our if we have the
opportunity to bring our stories to some
kind of ending you know if you watch a
if you watch a film or read a book that
final scene make sense of everything
that's happened before this doesn't
happen in life it is kind of end so we
we should be like author of our stories
more than at any point before death and
we have the opportunity what happens is
the opposite we become like cameos in
this story you know the main characters
are our loved ones or the doctors or
people making all these decisions and we
kind of get sidelined so yeah these
fictional or mythical stories just these
things that just give us a sense of
where our experience fits into a wider
sense of meaning we've you know we've
we've kind of lost touch with out the
last couple of hundred years and there's
a lot of good stuff that's come with
that because we've embraced you know
science and knowledge at the expense of
superstition of course but I you know
we've kind of lost touch of something so
we've lost a little bit of touch with
nature and the the natural laws of
things living and dying and I think we
as human beings today are probably more
alienated from particularly the death of
farm animals and things along those
lines like where where food comes from
actually seeing death even if your dog
is sick you bring him to the vet the vet
puts them down you know all these things
that people probably experience
firsthand for hundreds and hundreds of
years particularly like raising animals
and that Jenna's just completely removed
from the equation for most folks yeah
that sort of embodied dialogue without
that dialogue with with ecology with
nature as engineers and I can't view of
like what what the kind of indigenous
peoples and like that you have the shame
and our view of what the shaming is is
so skewed by our kind of Western mode
then yeah what they're they're tapping
into is not like it isn't the
supernatural that's not sort of the
that's not really the mode what you have
and you still have it in these
indigenous peoples that sort of say live
like a rural Asia and so on that where
these these
these ways of living is still going on
is what's clear is it's not the
supernatural it isn't the spirit it's
it's all about a really easy
relationship with the natural world so
an example of this is a great book
called the spell of the sensuous by
David Abrams who actually was a magician
originally he went out and lived amongst
his people and he he talks about this
and he said there was he was staying in
this compound this shaman's compound and
the the shaman's wife would bring him
some fruit every morning but she also
had these little like banana leaves with
rice in and she would she was going off
and doing something else with those and
he asked where they were going and he
shed all those of her the spirits of the
house right so what and then she'd come
back and without them she was just
wandering kind of what that meant and
what he was doing so one day he just
kind of followed and watched her and she
was placing these little pockets of
these little things of rice out around
the perimeter of this compound and he
was watching him and from a distance and
he saw the rice start to move and yet a
moment of like oh this is the spirits
what is this and then the rice moved
along the ground and it's ants it's ants
so what she's actually doing she's
putting out rice for the ants so then he
had the thought of oh it isn't spirits
it's just ants and then you realize no
of course the ants kind of are the
spirits right so this is a house where
food is prepared or they have a lot of
fun of big events and an ant infestation
would be just disastrous for them so the
spirit that the offering to the spirits
of the house is a kind of a dialogue
with the answers gonna if we we're going
to put this rice out can you just if you
just have the rice if we do this every
day will you leave us alone and and then
you know that's it like it's it's kind
of thats it's quite simple dialogue and
a sort of this lovely kind of embodied
relationship with with nature that of
course we're so far from here and so
interestingly we do tend to pack a lot
of ideas into the you know the
supernatural even like the unconscious
and depth psychology and so much I'm a
big fan of but we can take all this the
unknown stuff and shove it into these
kind of bottomless pits or is actually
interestingly if you trace it back it
seems like it just wasn't like that
this very what doesn't it depend on what
they're doing is particularly shamans so
if a shaman is concentrating on
psychedelic drugs they're an ayahuasca
Church and they're giving people
dimethyltryptamine like this is the they
are dealing with the supernatural that's
a very bizarre and intense
transformative experience they're
putting people through yeah and there's
different like that term shaman it
really it kind of was very rare very
rare to be discussed up until about
maybe 20 plus years ago yeah and it
seems like there's been some sort of a
psychedelic revolution over the last
couple of decades and it's almost become
a little bit too popular here where a
bunch of people are profiting from it or
there they're opportunists and they're
they're labeling themselves as shaman I
think the term that they use in Peru
they call them plastic shaman and
they're setting up shop and putting
together this ayahuasca brew and having
all these Americans come in flying in
Europeans or you know air-quote
spiritual experience and these are not
necessarily pure shaman and the greatest
sense of the word it's a different this
is what we think of when we think of
shaman today we think of someone who
conducts a psychedelic ritual exactly
which I know very little of you know
having had any experience I'm excited if
I put you know real CAF real coffee but
the decaf how come why haven't you tried
something
nothing psilocybin nothing no I never
even like smoked a cigarette or anything
I'm it's it's it's a real magicians
thing it's kind of like Penn Jillette's
like that too
yeah it's very common it's sort of a I
think it's I can erotic control thing
yeah during that kind of period where if
you're gonna do it you're gonna be doing
it then and then and then that kind of
time passes and it just ends up being
something that gets missed like a lot of
blood magicians don't drink don't smell
yeah it's quite an had the strangest
response when I asked him about that he
said I think we've figured out
everything we can from those things
really I was like but you have it yeah
you haven't you we've learned everything
we can learn from these psychedelic
trips was what his perception was
I don't know if he's amended that since
then this is over a decade ago we had
this conversation but that thought
process is fascinating to me mmm because
uh you talking about like this
transformative experience that you've
put through people through with these
shows setting them up these you know
they think the world is different and
changed and then they change because of
that I think what we're missing is our
is our is the it's the experience of
transcendence that's important yeah
religions originally gave people that
there was a time in history where we're
a religion was being born and it was
giving people a phenomenological
imported experience of the transcendent
whatever that was whatever they're in
and then time moves on and then that
kind of moves out of living memory and
so do you kind of have to you need to
recreate it recreate those feelings
through practices and and then those
practices start to becoming at rituals
and dogma and by this point you're
creating a sort of recreating a belief
but the the sort of the that embodied
experience has sort of kind of faded
into the background and then of you know
I'm a I'm an atheist but that I could
see that what you left with thousands of
years later is is quite easy to knock
down and to kind of poke fun off but
actually it's at some level I think it's
it is not doing a very good job of but
pointing back to the original experience
the importance of transcendence now you
can do spiritual eyes that doesn't have
to be about anything overly spiritual
but like finding something bigger than
yourself in life and throwing yourself
into that thing is how we find meaning
right a meaning trumps happiness or
anything else and that might be through
your kids I guess this is why people
generally sort of we have kids at a
certain point you know our ego gets sort
of stepped down so that you know that
that's and if he what we what we do
instead I guess is with hens the you
know interest in these dodgy shamans we
just put it in all the wrong places
money fame and so on that you don't
supply they do not supply those feelings
of transcendence we think they will
because we think you know a rich and
glamorous life will lift us up and out
of our boring everyday lives but of
course they're you know they don't work
there's something there's something that
that relationship to the mysterious that
even me as an atheist and the rest of it
I kind of fun it's important we have to
have stats somewhere someone our lives
that needs to be some kind of space for
that it doesn't need to be anything
spiritual it just is a kind of a respect
for and understanding that serving
something bigger than yourself whatever
whatever that is and whoever says is a
important part of being human I like
that that keeps coming back to you this
recognition of your work as being
something that's bigger than yourself
you pour yourself into this and through
that experience you somehow transcend
that something comes out of it you you
you you grow with the creation of this
thing in some way and while it's
happening you're about as alive as you
can be right me well I'm happy if you
know my breath is decent 4:00 in the
afternoon
very very low ambitions with stuff but
it's but it's for the certainty for the
guys going through it or people going
through it I hope it gives them you know
a profound and transformative experience
I for me i i i i get very um i get kind
of a bit low if i'm not actively engaged
in something creative so that that is
important for me but you know the
painting or whatever these roth yeah you
were referring to the painting in the
exact same way so you think bigger than
yourself yeah yeah that's projects
something to occupy your mind in your
spirit and your creative juices
yeah it's that's i think that's a really
it's a vital part of your life making
sense of something you know the people
sadly that throw themselves off
buildings it's not they're unhappy it's
that they've normally there's no meaning
has gone that that's that's the real
that's the real killer it's lack of
meaning and we find meaning through
throwing ourselves into something bigger
and recognizing that and you know i
think maybe the reason why this sort of
work on you know myth and so on is
because sort of feeling like he's coming
back into the pack under that dialogue
now is because because it's something
that's something kind of real brackets
fictional to kind of yes you know to
hang on to these importantly i think
articulate something that's needs to be
recognized and somehow honored within
within life do you know who Tyson Fury
is no I don't he's a British heavyweight
boxer who's the lineal heavyweight
champion and he went through severe
depression he won the title from
Vladimir Klitschko who had held it for
many many years and beat him and then
felt like he had accomplished his goals
and just went into a real bad funk yeah
gained a ton of weight started drinking
every night carrying on and got suicidal
and was thinking about driving his
Ferrari into a bridge and then decided
that he was going to make another run at
the heavyweight championship and so
through all this depression and suicidal
thoughts and all these different things
what turned him around was goal-setting
the idea that he had something to work
towards and something to live for and
then getting in shape and then forcing
himself to be on this path try to
achieve that goal but then what happened
if I takes place in December first it
hasn't happened yet the rematch hasn't
happened yet but he's lost more than 160
pounds he's he slim and he looks
fantastic and healthy I mean he was
really fat and really large and very
very depressed and now he's really happy
and no medication and that's the
craziest thing about it is we're always
searching for some pill that's going to
fix whatever weird funky path the mind
is on but for him what he found was that
goal setting like having something that
you're striving towards and working
towards and this danger is though what
happens afterwards it's exactly the
danger because that's what he said I
asked him I said well what if you win
yeah what if you win the title what if
you fight Deontay Wilder in December
first and you beat him and you become
the championship maybe I'll balloon back
up to 400 pounds again and get depressed
and I don't say that as I'm worried that
he's being honest because he has been
down that road before but it's
fascinating that he achieved real
happiness from attempting to work
towards these goals and and building
towards these goals and having this
vision in his mind
I think a real thing happened with
Christianity that kind of exploded a
relatively new idea onto the scene a
couple of thousand years ago which sober
mind
so prior to Christianity you kind of had
the stoic sight for five hundred years
they were the you know the hugely
popular philosophical school and they're
all about a very mind they're also the
first directory from the east so there's
a kind of ideas around like
non-attachment and mindfulness that are
sort of differently expressed in a much
more Western rational way but they kind
of reflect some of those ideas and they
were going on in Buddhism at the time so
the idea of happiness was very much
about your relationship to the current
moment and your emotional state in the
in the moment and then also stepping
back from a whole life and you know they
said you couldn't really judge anyone as
happy until they're on the deathbed and
then what is what is the story that
that's emerged what happened with
Christianity is for the first time there
was this this new message that no no you
suffer now and your reward will happen
in the future and it's it's like it's an
amazing idea particularly if you're
suffering and that was you know a time
when there was Hellenic wars and you
know as a time of great suffering so an
amazingly powerful message but like that
idea of you can take that sort of
spiritual ladder that idea of sort of
climbing towards you're sort of this
shimmering golden haze of a reward
heaven whatever it is off in the
distance that's now the corporate ladder
right that idea that that mode has has
stayed with us we now like in England
I'm not familiar enough with the school
structure here but in England when
you're you're 16 you're choosing your
a-levels right which is what you finish
school with to then decide what you're
going to like major in at university in
order to then what job you're going to
get at the end of that and what
promotion you could get and what you're
going to work your way up to and were
like what is that moment what is that
point that it's that that end you know
we're so we are so fixated on what's
coming and I know this is in a way it's
sort of like well this is familiar in
terms of you know the importance of
mindfulness and so on but it also ties
in with like our fear of death
you know death death is interesting
unpacking my deaths frightening because
you know we're not gonna be there when
it happens and all those things but it
seems to be that it's frightening
because our projects will end you know
that whether it should kids or grandkids
that you won't see grow up or well
there's always something that's going to
come to an end and the the antidote to
that seems to be just just reappraising
that constant fixation on the end on the
on the future so that's why I'm you know
I I hear that and got hurt I mean how
amazing he's found that now but I can't
help but think at the you know I can't
couldn't agree more about this idea of
working towards something when you're in
school that you're you're you're almost
trying to reach an end that never comes
I mean you're you're you're building for
something and also the pressure that
they put on children to start that off
at age fourteen fifteen sixteen and to
pick what you're going to be doing for
the rest of your life and this idea that
one day you're going to air quotes make
it yeah and then you're gonna make it
more but if you did you'd be like you
guys interfere in that situation now on
yeah like this friend of mine has said
have built up the company and then sold
it it was depressing her to go and to do
that that need the thing that has been
driving it that's still there and then
somebody go and it's like you've much
better off having something unfulfilled
that at least is taking care of you so
you need you need something that's gonna
be perpetually you know rewarding but
perhaps stimulating stimulating I mean
the human mind needs to engage in
puzzles and and and projects and
creative endeavors and all sorts of
different there's requirements that the
mind has I believe that mirror
requirements that the body has we think
of the body having requirements like you
need some daily exercise you need good
food I think you need some mental
exercise and I think you need knowledge
you need information you need wisdom you
need that too you need inspiration and
inspiration like when we're talking
about all the the different things you
can do to someone as a hypnotist or you
can do to someone when you're putting
together these shows and changing their
perspective on things through these
transformative events
that's in a lot of ways it's a type of
fuel for the mind and inspiration is a
type of fuel for the amount of great
book it's fuel for the mind you know
even sometimes people mean this fast
food culture that we live and we like it
in a little tiny meme a little
inspirational meme on someone's
Instagram page I like that that's how I
like that it makes me feel good as it
gives you a little bit of a some
nutrition for your mind but at the same
time is its squaring that with how that
life is it's actually really ambiguous
and complex mm-hmm and that's that to me
is the that's the big thing to become I
think more conscious of which it's
probably the best we can really aim for
us to become more conscious of the
things that beset us because the stuff
around conscious of is the stuff that
owns us yes yes and the stuff we were
unwilling to acknowledge yeah that's the
stuff that comes back and biases issues
that you yeah in the background
constantly yes absolutely the Humes
model of psycho psychoanalysis I love it
as he talks about the God so he was very
much didn't talk about like that that
the the Greek model of the gods because
they didn't necessarily like worship the
gods and believed that they were like
real divinities in the way that we might
talk about God now but they what they
were doing was honoring these different
sort of like clusters of energy like
like you the god of like eros like so
that's you
you honor eros because it's important to
honor the sort of the erotic urge and if
you don't if you don't honor that it's
going to come back and get you so the
homophobic televangelists that gets you
know caught in bed with some guy and
it's some massive scandal it will come
back and bite if you just try to bury
something in you it will come back and
bite you and I like that but it it just
means that it you know life is
ambivalent and complex and I think the
best we can do is is try and be
conscious of that and not be constantly
introducing things to so easy packages
but at the same time house do you
navigate forward without room without
reducing things for an easy story that's
the own
where you can make sense and move
forward is to is to have an easy story
so it's it's a that's like a whole
lifetimes
you know preoccupation that's right yeah
it is all messy yeah we do love to
simmer things down to a nice tasty
little easily digestible package but the
reality is when you open that package
there every package is intensely complex
like every single situation has all
these different interacting factors that
led to that situation taking place and
if you take them all into consideration
and really dwell on it like you just get
paralysis by analysis exactly exactly
exactly but a consciousness is awareness
it's probably the most we can we can aim
for at least in our own lives God you
can only you can only sort your own life
our cornea they probably also plays into
hypnotic suggestibility and my own work
in terms of suggestibility because we
are we're looking for direction which is
essentially that the simple message the
easy message was so we just kind of kind
of wired to grab hold of that and absorb
it yeah it's kind of what a hypnotist
it's like a director somebody giving you
something you know you can hang on to
when you're just kind of confused that's
sort of essentially I guess what what
suggestibility is you're essentially
confused and looking for an answer and
at that moment someone is giving you the
answer in the in the right way but
correct me if I'm wrong there's no clear
scientific understanding of what
hypnosis is it's not like there's like
you can clearly show like this is what's
happening and that's how it works and
this is why it works there is I don't
think there's an easy answer to that but
there is like a said forget the
hypnotist and the performers there is a
whole big body of like clinical work
investigating it because it's clearly a
thing yeah suggestibility as part of the
human experience but as to what it is
well that's kind of days yeah I know the
question because you can't ever quite
climb inside a person's head and no but
I lie in one of the shows I did I did a
show where took you know sirhan sirhan
who assassinated bobby kennedy so he
said he was
you know hypnotized by the CIA so mmm it
was like that that's his story right
near the hole he sets out how how that
happened so we took that said well let's
let's do it let's set up a an
assassination see whether or not is it
plausible I mean is it if you take some
of this is possible do Belize and we did
it we did we got a guy and the show
starts with a big audience of people
that are up for taking part I find the
most suggestible person in the audience
and by the end of it he finds himself in
a packed theater know it doesn't know
it's being filmed he's got what he
thinks is a real gun which he thinks is
a thing that he's got to carry with him
and for a bit of filming is going to do
later but he has a real gun on him and
we set off these little triggers in the
same way so how's her hand said happened
to him right so there's a girl with a
polkadot dress there's a sound that he
hears which we had as someone's ringtone
next to him the little triggers that
they had apparently implanted take would
you do it with that guy he has no idea
this is being filmed doesn't know it's
part of the show is in a packed theater
we've got Stephen Fry on stage right
he's he's the guy that's gonna get
assassinated so he's underneath he's
wearing squibs and everything he knows
that you may get assassinated at some
point during the show will the guy do it
he does it right he stands up and does
it he fires what she's a real gun with a
weird thing of expecting pandemonium
from the audience and there's that weird
normalcy bias that kicks him her phone
just sat there thinking is this part of
the show we had all this crowd control
people and like nothing happened but he
did it like you know he he shoots it but
that was good as I mentioned that
because at the beginning of it we're
doing this test with the guy and you
know the people in the room and sort of
looking at what is what is going on with
it Moses so we had this we had an ice
bath and i hypnotized him and told him
under hypnosis he'd be able to come to
be get in the ice bath and he wouldn't
feel the temperature and I had no idea
if he would cuz like that's a real test
like if he's just sort of playing along
at some level you're not gonna you're
not gonna get in an ice bath like that
even if it's even if there's some kind
of physiological state you can tap into
to make that possible that some people
with training can do as a first-time
just step in and do it he's gonna is not
gonna be able to do that and I had these
two clinical hit meters with me they
he might made a bet on whether or not
you'd do it they thought he wouldn't do
it I had no idea and he did do it and it
really kind of sort of threw me he was
come to be laying in this ice bath and
see the temperature you had him kind of
linked up to a thermograph thing we had
to pull him out if he was at a certain
temperature I think if it got to
whatever it was 50 whatever that means
we had to take him out you know and that
was that was extrordinary so although I
I think of it in very behavioral terms I
don't think of it as any kind of special
we had stayed then it's not well then
you know what's what was going on with
that guy well it's it's a physiological
possibility that we can do that because
somebody can do it through lots of
trainings so maybe it just kind of would
this guy cut to the chase and he was
able to just do it but I don't know what
the next guy do it hypnotized probably
not I don't know what about that the
ethical complications that are involved
in having a guide literally perform
murder I mean he doesn't what he's not
he knows it's an act he doesn't know
that he's not performing murder he
thinks he's a murderer mm-hmm and then
you put it on television yeah you have a
murderer
yeah he's murderer I mean there's a
there's a good case to show a his being
like couldn't completely condition but
that's terrifying that a this is
possible and that be to this person that
has never experienced anything like that
before finds out that it's possible for
him and that he actually squeezes the
trigger and watch the Stephen Fry fall
to the ground the squibs go off and he
thinks he's a murderer and look if you
follow the logic that the FBI is used
because the FBI is do use similar logic
to talk some pretty mentally challenged
people into detonating fake bombs that
were purchased from the FBI and those
people are in jail for life and this is
a thing that happened in Dallas there
was a young man who was very suggestible
and he had some serious psychological
problems probably and he was a radical
and he wanted to become some sort of a
terrorist whether it was al-qaeda or
Isis or whatever and
the FBI infiltrated this guy is life and
set him up and and got him or whatever
organization was whether the CIA or FBI
they or they organized some sort of an
artificial bomb they got this bomb to
him had him set up the bomb and then
gave him this you know ability to
detonate it he goes to detonate it and
then they arrest him so there was no
bomb the bomb didn't exist
they talked him into doing it and they
genuinely genuinely in jail for Liza
they talked him into doing it they
provided him with the bomb the bomb
didn't exist it wasn't a real bomb it
wasn't gonna kill anybody and they took
this person and essentially did a
version of what you did but it wasn't
funny it wasn't for a television show
but through the same intent through this
guy's different intent hopefully well
for him the intent was to kill and the
intent to kill Stephen Fry or the intent
to kill whatever innocent people he was
going to get with his bomb essentially
they were both talked into doing there's
no real evidence this guy would have
ever done it without the FBI or CIA or
whoever the fuck else it was that did
that yeah but if that had ended with
them stepping in and going okay we're
gonna stop you here this was an
experiment yes you've been conditioned
to do this we wanted to see if you would
you have done it and now here's a very
careful and delicate do you anything to
make sure you're okay that would be a
different story and somehow the ends
would then it would be like a maybe even
a fascinating and valuable thing to do
if if the guy was fine at the end of it
and happy with it and it wasn't in jail
yeah well that's kind of more the world
that we're in here and you know this is
a no I'm not making a judgment on what
you're doing I think what you're doing
is awesome but I mean I think it's fair
I think what they did is kind of fucked
up and not just fucked up but crazy that
this is this is this waste of resources
I mean maybe I'm incorrect and maybe
this person was on that path anyway and
they recognized it and they stepped in
this and listen this guy's gonna do
something and we're gonna help him and
because we need to get this guy off the
streets so let's show that he's capable
of detonating a bomb and killing a bunch
of civilians
and we'll provide him with that whatever
he needs then we'll get him maybe they
did it that way I don't know I don't
really you know obviously I wasn't there
when all this was going down but it
seems eerily parallel yeah well yeah my
concern is I guess what makes hopefully
what makes this show's compelling at
these sorts of questions the sort of
yeah patience beyond a controlled thing
with one guy who's fine also it opens
the door to the possibility that this
has been done in the past most
Manchurian Candidate possibility like
that well yeah perspective
you must think it's possible right well
I after making that show I sort of felt
well that worked it doesn't mean that
his story is true of course it doesn't
it doesn't right really necessarily we
have to relate to that at all but but
you yeah it was yeah kind of it sort of
kind of works yeah it worked
yeah why did you write a book about
happiness I wrote a book about happiness
because the Stoics had really resonated
with me I was I like I I studied law I
was supposed to be a lawyer and I
graduated and I kind of was living in
Bristol this lovely city in England and
making my living as a magician because
that wasn't the hobby that it I'd
started and I was just kind of thinking
what I need to some point would this
just grow into a job I don't know but I
I know that my priorities are just kind
of I want my life my days to feel like
this is good everything's in the right
place and this is kind of an enjoyable
and worthwhile pastime and while
existence and I never really thought
beyond that I've never had any kind of
ambition genuinely a bit of any any sort
which is why you know I don't really I'm
not have a whole goal-setting thing
particularly so but the trouble with
thinking like that as you grow up and
become successful with what you do is
you start to feel like a kid like
everyone else has have grown up and
you're the kid and and you've slightly
embarrassed that you don't seem to care
enough about the things that everybody
else cares about mm-hmm the business
things and the viewing figures and this
I my interest was genuinely am i
enjoying what I'm doing and is it
worthwhile and then I read the Stoics
and although that's not like their
central message it's a big part of their
what they write about you know not
not trying to control things they're out
of your control not attaching yourself
to things that leave you kind of
emotionally kind of vulnerable and you
know just your relationship to the
present moment and so on and it really
resonated so I I read up I read a lot
and it took me off into other directions
and I started writing and I wrote this
book on happiness after it took me three
years to write it while I was on tour so
three years but blocks of blocks of
writing not like three solid years but
also that meant by the end of it I kind
of had grown and changed and felt
differently and I think for anyone that
knows about stoicism and it's so
immensely valuable resource in terms of
if what you want is a sense of feeling
centered and the kind of emotional
robustness in your life and you know if
you suffer from anxiety insides it's
it's phenomenal I think that where it
where it slightly doesn't deliver is the
importance of anxiety it's all about
avoiding anxiety that their image of
happiness was a sort of tranquility
avoiding disturbance that actually
caused disturbance is really important
anxiety is important in life because how
do you change how do you grow other than
you know unless some anxiety triggers
that you know lets you know that
something's wrong yes if we just look
for security all the time and I say this
because I know I'm like this like this
is my my problem is that I'm too I'm
very good at avoiding stress very good
avoiding anxiety but the dangerous I am
I gonna grow or you know I'm just gonna
just be too comfortable that's not you
know that's not necessarily a good thing
so so yeah by the end of the book I was
I kind of could feel the edges of
Stoicism in terms of the importance of
anxiety and you know and not just living
too comfortably but it is it is a and
that's not yeah they were movers and
shakers like there are people that
change the worlds Marcus Aurelius you
know greatest philosopher King really
was an emperor most powerful man and
ever was probably ruled the earth and
was a was a one of the great Stoics so
they're not like it's not a recipe for
complacency which you can often sound
like when you talk about this kind of
tranquility and non-attachment but it is
it's it's it's just it's a very robust
kind of language they talk about being
like a
Rock where the waves are lashing against
you and I prefer the image of a sort of
don't if you know Martha Nussbaum who's
a American philosopher writes a lot
about these things but she she talks
about being more porous like a rock that
the the waves the water can move through
and I think that's a more helpful image
I think that's a that's a good way I
think of stepping out into life is if
you can have a a sort of a robustness
but at the same time they're kind of an
easy porous relationship with what's
going on that gives you that easier
relationship to fate and fortune and all
those things that they used to honor and
recognize so much more than we do now
because we don't read tragedy so we
don't think in terms of those things
it's all just you know pride and hubris
now that they had lessons about back
then and you know but I think that's
really I think that's that's a good
that's a good starting point for life so
I wrote I wrote this book happy it is
it's actually just become available in
the in the US on Amazon I don't think
you'll find it any book shops but um
because of the like I'm to be hopefully
doing a Broadway show next year and
these Netflix specials and things that
are you know so they it is now available
and and ironically the moment I finished
writing it I was out giving talks on
happiness feeling oddly sad and I
couldn't work out why it was because
this amazing three-year writing project
it ended and I realized yeah I the
importance of some kind of creative
pursuit or something that brings you out
of yourself is so important that's
fascinating that in the embracing of the
anxiety of the difficulty of the task
and finding upon its completion that you
feel sad
oddly oddly well it's kind of proof of
concept that yeah right I mean with what
you're saying like in this theme that
you keep saying over and over again that
putting yourself into something bigger
than you something something that you're
you're attempting to work through and
that through this difficulty and all the
struggle and trying to put this
something you you gain some sort of
intangible benefit from this mmm you
feel like you seem like you're someone
that seeks out those things you seem you
know you've always like immerse yourself
fully and things that would do that yes
I'm a firm believer in the importance of
difficult tasks
I think I think seeking comfort is one
of the worst things a person can do in
terms of achieving overall happiness I
think overall happiness a lot of it
comes through this amazing sense of
wonder and the unknown and possibilities
and working towards things with this
embracing of you know having no idea how
that what the result is going to be no
idea where this is going to go and being
genuinely nervous about it every step of
the way and you find that cuz normally
being having the language for something
means that it doesn't come naturally
because if that came entirely naturally
all the things I'm saying if they
completely just I'd always been like
that you wouldn't have the language
clear the entirely unconscious so you
found this is stuff that you've found
and then learn to articulate but because
it is that's not it's not an easy thing
it's not a not an intuitive thing that
maybe life is is essentially difficult
and on these lovely happy moments we
have are wonderful but they're not the
kind of they're not the central force of
life which is that it is it is difficult
and it--and if you want to philosophy of
life it has to work in those has to work
at the Divya doesn't it otherwise it's
not really it's not really gonna support
you I think it's also the attitude in
which you embrace those difficult
moments and how you approach them you
know if you if you relish them and and
understand that there's going to be some
genuine benefit from getting through
these and whether it's a physical thing
or a mental thing whether it's a
creative thing whatever it is it's
difficult like just embrace this massive
struggle and enjoy this just the puzzle
of it all the majesty of the unknown and
then when you get through it on the
other end you get a different level of
happiness yeah you have this powerful
earned happy because you grow yeah you
don't you don't cross the road on your
own without having to let go of your
mother's hand at some point yeah
something well this is this is the death
and resurrection isn't it that's why
these myths do have some resonance yeah
something has to die before something
new before something you can grow you
have to something has to be let go of in
order to step forward so if you're gonna
grow you have to there has to be anxiety
and disturbance and some kind of some
sort of death in the metaphorical sense
yeah that's toughest and doesn't come
easily no it doesn't come easily but
that's also what's beautiful about it if
it just came easily I don't think it
would be appreciated
exactly you wouldn't be doing it and
there's all this resistance to even
engage in in the first place it's hard
to write the first word of a book
alright the first word sometimes you're
just sitting there or anything you're
trying to do get it the first step of a
10 mile run all those things are the
most difficult thing once you once
you're going it's not nearly as hard
it's getting going there's something
about overcoming all this anticipation
and all the weirdness of it all you know
and then once you do it and you realize
you can do it it enriches you in all
your future attempts so you know
something like you deciding to run a
marathon would help you decide to write
a book like all these different things
are interconnected the poet Rilke Rainer
Maria Rilke talks about him always love
this image of like some people live in a
big room there's some people live in a
small room and some people just like
just pace up and down by the window kind
of read that although I do a lot with my
life but I think instinctively I'm the
guy that's just sort of pacing up and
down by the window
instinctively how so in that I'm a
little shy and I kind of I'm very good
at avoiding
I just think you're smart to avoid no I
is a lot of it is like look the
interaction between human beings is so
who knows what the fuck's gonna happen
you know I mean you you you don't know
how people are gonna perceive you
there's potential bad feelings that
could come with that is there's all
sorts of weird social anxiety and social
cues that you have to read and the
complications of those make sure you get
it right don't want to get it wrong
don't want to be too rude don't want to
be too forward don't want to be too
British I like oh it's I think it's the
case with everybody I mean the the the
reason for shyness is there's a terrible
feeling when you're rejected you know
the meeting someone who doesn't enjoy
the way you've presented yourself as an
awful feeling that will haunt you for
hours if not days I've had interactions
with people and then two weeks later
I'll be putting gas in my car just go
yeah what did I say why did I say it
like that like who knows like that's all
of that is there's a reason why people
have some sort of a weird anxiety about
interactions and it's also the stuff
that which is why that the difficulty is
so worth embracing because if you can if
you can if you can embrace it that's
where there is a kind of oddly sublime
space because that you know that's the
real stuff of life and then that's the
stuff that actually binds everyone
together and that the the the happy
moments well there might just be happy
cuz you you know a bit Lucia is great
and they're wonderful but you might just
you just haven't got all got all the
information at that point right that's
kind of what's going on so those when we
when we when we're embroiled in the
difficulty I think that's when we're
most human and it doesn't necessarily
make it any easier by its nature but
there is a real value to that there's a
level of growth and a kind of an a sort
of just a voice somewhere in the
background that is or is just a a note
of this this is this is what binds
everyone together
and I think the as you said yeah it's
it's a better type of happiness but it
doesn't it doesn't come easy but look I
think life is about growing up is about
tolerating ambiguity isn't it more than
more than anything when we're infants we
scream and someone comes and gives us
the thing that makes us yes good and
there was a British and child
psychologist called
Donald Winnicott who sort of kind of
appeared after Freud and then that a lot
of there was a lot of people felt so
guilty and terrible after Freud was
there damaging their kids and he had
this great message of like you've
actually what the mother or the the
principal caregiver needs to be is good
enough what she actually needs to do is
to gently let down her infant right
because if you if you if you just grow
up thinking that every time you scream
someone's gonna give you what you want
if you make enough fuss you'll just get
what you want that's not a very healthy
way of growing up into adult life or
becoming a leader so instead what the
but your mother caregiver needs to do is
to is to let you down
needs to disillusion you you need to
learn science ice cream and I won't get
those things and that that's okay and
you know um so likewise you know in life
like living with disillusionment is like
that's that's that's fine that's how it
isn't if we don't have that if we live
out this sort of fantasy that we owed
that were owed something should why a
loathe like that the secret that idea
that the universe is arranging itself
around our banal fucking wishes of and
it's always like mattresses and
obviously and they got she the fact that
she sort of said all this all goes back
to Plato I mean I did they couldn't have
been any any further from the idea of
you know wandering all these kind of
material games it's it's fascinating how
this subject repeats itself in some sort
of a strange intermittent cycle where
people start talking about manifesting
things that's a thing well it's recently
it seems to be working its way back
around again where it was it was outside
of the conversation for quite a long
time but now it seems to be coming back
again where people are always looking
for reasons why certain people are
successful and and that's a big one the
big one is this this idea that people
can manifest things with their mind yeah
and you know when it comes from again
discussing this with people who've
become successful and they're looking
for reason as to why they're successful
and it's very hard to accredit luck or
chance well it's an element I know the
whole story but you don't secret thing
an element the power of positive
thinking is an element all these things
are our elements but they're all
combined with circumstance luck genetics
cultural interactions the way human
beings they're just with the time of the
year you're born you know I mean there's
so many different factors there's so
many things that can lead to you I mean
and also where you're born I mean you do
where where are you living
I mean all these things have a huge
factor in your success try being a
entrepreneur in Ethiopia
it's a different experience than being
you know a tech startup guy in San
Francisco it's clearly one of them has
an advantage and there's there's a lot
of those things that play into each
other and to say well you know the guy
in Ethiopia he just wasn't thinking
about it the right way
he didn't he didn't make a wish board
and put his pictures of his uh his house
with his Ferrari in front of it or
whatever the fuck he's trying to it's
it's an it is it's the infant's urge
it's now screaming into the and the
universe will provide
but there's something hey that the
universe doesn't get should be our
starting point of like living but surely
the universe doesn't care what's a
perspective enhancer I mean the universe
in in and of itself is a perspective
enhancer minutes yeah if you can go
somewhere in the country where there's
no light pollution and see the Milky Way
you just you get this okay okay this is
a lot bigger than I'm thinking it's I
think it's one of the real problems that
we have with our society with with
electrical lights that sort of blind out
the Stars stop saying we don't get
humbled there's that the book I
mentioned spell of the sensuous this guy
David Abrams who without living in rural
East Asia he described at the very
beginning this amazing image he was
living in this hut and it was his he
wakes up in the middle of the night he's
only just kind of I guess been there for
a night or two and he's in this paddy
field which has become drenched with
water right with rain he steps out and
you have this incredible star filled
clear sky which is reflected most
pitch-black apart from that right so
star-filled sky it's reflected perfectly
like a like a mirror in this drenched
enormous paddy field that is there's
fireflies everywhere in between flying
around right there's little little hunks
of lion and he had no sense of like what
was up what was down which he had
totally disoriented this feeling of just
falling through space it's a great
opening to the book Wow yeah we don't
get a lot of that we don't get we we
missed that part the Galactic part we
really do it's so unfortunate whenever
I'm out in the country and I look up I
see it I go
I was in Utah a couple of months ago and
it was we're way in the mountains and it
was there was no light just nothing and
you look up it's just fill the stars
every inch of the sky had stars on it
it's just it's it's so humbling and I
think it's such a powerful image for
human beings and it's inspired so much
so much pondering throughout human
history and so so much philosophy and so
much so much of the way people interpret
our position in the universe is based on
this image this undeniable image of the
cosmos that it's so magnificent and yet
in our amazing technological society
that we've created we have a side effect
and that side effect is light pollution
that light pollution has shut off one of
the most magnificent inspirations that's
available in the natural world it's
available to us every night instead we
block it out with fucking 7/11 lights
and then the more vidoes touch with that
not just not just that but the widest
sense of that the mystery that yeah that
is represented by oh yeah I don't know
everything I don't know you know then
sadly what do we have we have people
like me who have magicians doing tricks
and psychic mediums pretending to
connect with the dead that's like our
art audrey arm sir deserve the rose
fighting a sense of mystery they're just
hustlers it surrenders i sat in a young
studio audience once and watching a
psychic it was one of those TV filmed
ones where there's where there's an
audience I was just like so before
filming starts he came out and he said
so anybody here that's hoping you know
hoping that um someone's gonna come
through and all these hands go up and he
just asked people so well you know what
do you who you hoping will come through
okay what do they look like is there
anything because I'll let you know if
they come through is there anything I
can ask any bit of information they
could give me that nobody could possibly
know that will prove to you it's them
yes yes he he drowned he was wearing a
red sweater okay if I want to let you
know if he comes through and then they
start filming and he just says all those
things to them and
I think about the reason why that stuff
is is like people do believe it is that
the lie is so ugly that it's so much
easier to believe something amazing must
be going on there than right is he is it
just that ugly and pathetic a lie that's
such a horrible experience so many of
them yeah I mean they have had
television shows were they there was a
medium television show where this woman
was connecting people with their dead
relatives and it was so fake
there's the questions were shitty it was
so poorly thought out it wasn't just a
lie was a lively moron yeah that's a
shame
oh there was I did one of my shows I had
I got like 50 people up on stage had
like a like an audience thing set up on
stage and I was doing mediumship with
them and providing like like very
accurate information but at the same
time saying I am you know I'm lying
right your grandmother's telling me
she's not telling me anything I'm making
this up you understand and then after
the so who's got an interesting kind of
lying right place right and then
afterwards of I think it was the first
night of doing the show I went out to
stage door and I was talking to people
there and there was a girl who'd seen
the show and she said will you worm I
wonder if you could put me in touch with
my dead grandmother and I said I've got
well I hope you understand from what
I've just done that I don't I'm not
really doing it that's kind of the point
she Don and I understand I know you
can't redo it but would you be able to
put me into season it's an amazing
capacity for just this kind of
dissonance well that's how cults work
right yeah I mean that's the only way
they can work once you get a hold of the
manuscript and you read whatever it was
whether it's Mormonism and Joseph
Campbell the 14 year old boy found
golden tablets that contain the lost
work of Jesus and only he could read
with this magic seer stone if you if you
you know if you have any critical
thinking left in you at all at that
point you just you put the book down yo
what the fuck am i doing with my life
but people don't want that they want
they want the the universe is so
open-ended and the possibility of
your your existence expiring at any
moment and you just vanishing into
nothingness and this consciousness which
is literally stopping the lights go
black and that's it it's so terrifying
to us that we we would prefer some
nonsensical unrealistic version of
something but rigid so we know how to
follow it and a bunch of other people
follow it as well and we have this
community of people to follow it and we
gain comfort in that and some very very
strange way there's a sort of an for me
and an unexpected comfort that comes
with this sort of the meaninglessness of
it which I've only kind of recently kind
of found that that all of the people in
your life and the people that my people
that you work with and see a lot of but
that like an or you and they're not
being like a constant source of you know
niggling irritation like we you know we
have people like that or people that we
kind of admire or maybe are a bit
intimidated by or and it's like they're
just going to be the people they were
going to be they're going to be the
people that just kind of populated your
life one more and it will amount to no
more than that but they'll be they'll be
the people that were there and it's it's
hard to articulate but it's a I find
that like a it's a lot easier to kind of
love it's a lot easier to love when you
realize that it isn't the end of the day
it's all you know none of that's gonna
none of that's going to matter the the
the the guy that's annoying you every
day is these that's gonna be that was
that guy that was with you all your life
kind of annoying you but that was like
one of the one of these people in the
population I find it a very um very
powerful kind of just just reset in
terms of sort of attitudes towards
people that engender any kind of
nervousness irritation intimidation any
of those things it's like yeah these are
just these are my sounds you know but
these these these are my fellow people
these will be the people that these
would be the characters the people that
populated my life and then that's it's
kind of a nice thing so that makes sense
yes yes it does so an embracing that it
there is no great grand meaning to it
all
this sort of like the intimidation
doesn't matter they're delicious going
through their own shit as well and I'm
just a character in their lives but
that's kind of nice that like god this
guy was this person was with me every
day or even that famous person that
maybe I never even met but like how
weird that that was just like a force
within my life that that person
represented hmm something you know these
are these are said it's just a lot
easier to sort of go out in the world
with love which you know is ultimately
what we need to try and do with that
thought I think don't listen that's a
great attitude because anytime you can
have less annoyance you know by person
who's just whether they're ignorant or
confused or agitated or whatever is
causing them to behave in a way that's
uncomfortable for you anytime you can
just sort of just Aikido that and just
sort of like relax and just keep moving
and go yeah what are you gonna do and I
mean that's one less thing you have to
wrestle with in your psyche hey that's
just that's just a recipe for emotional
success period yeah well this is the
story cutter if you could only control
your thoughts and your actions and
powerful isn't it everything else what
other people do what they think
everything else outcomes I'm not under
you're not under your control so you can
decide that those things are fine and
that's such a like to really let that
idea drop into the soul that oh it's
fine what if it's fine if mmm My partner
handles stress badly and drives me what
if that's what oh that's that's fine
then and also that allows me them to be
a better partner and maybe be more
helpful right if I'm not internalizing
it making it all about me and you know
making it making it worse and again it
sounds like a recipe for complacency
about like the tennis analogy like like
so with success or with matters of
social injustice where you think wow I
and I need to I need to go out and
change that in the world as then it's
like a game of tennis if you go into a
game of tennis thinking I must win then
well then what happens when you start to
lose you become anxious you don't may as
well you're trying to control something
you can't
or as if you'd go into that same game
thinking I will play to the very best of
my abilities that's that's on the line
of your thoughts and your actions that's
something under your control and you'll
play better you'll get better results
that's that's a that's a become a big
thing for me and when I get stressed
about things I find that something is
really niggling away and bothering me
that thought of like hang on it's focus
it's always fine it's always something
outside of the thoughts and actions it's
always something else and it is fine
it's not me just someone else's thing
that it's just the way they're
manifesting that is annoying me but
that's it's fine it is fine it feels
like it when I was a kid and I just you
know wake up on a Saturday morning and
think I had to go to school and then
realize I didn't that kind of relief
yeah I feel that as an adult so much
that kind of it's fine
well I don't think it's a complacency
thing I mean the idea is that you're
you're you fear that this attitude would
lead to complacency I think it just
leads to you picking your battles
picking your battles exactly yeah which
is important is you're you're you're
wisely allocating resources right you
know you're not concentrating on some
shit that you're not gonna control
anyway yeah you know grabbing some guy
you don't even know listen man you got
to straighten your fucking life out
you're annoying and this is why and like
guys not gonna listen you it's it's just
an ineffective way to interact with
people you're way better off going on
yeah yeah sort myself out and your
reaction to him is the only thing you
could really control yeah I certainly
can't control him yeah but you can
control your reaction him and there's
some there's a certain amount of pride
in just being able to like huh whatever
and just to a person or a thing or
person's behavior that you might have
been furious about just a few years ago
or you know or deeply irritated by where
it would cling with you for days you'd
be in your car thinking about it but the
ability to just let that go or to even
enjoy it even enjoy it it's good stoic
advice which has come back now it's such
a I think through CBT seem to be the way
that stirs a CBT CBT not cock and ball
torture the other one cognitive
behavioral therapy
maybe for all I know yeah the cognitive
behavioral therapy is the kind of short
form therapy that is essentially getting
into the process of how a like an
anxiety pattern might happen and kind of
throw a spanner in that works and make
people by being more more aware of other
possibilities of behavior kind of
undoing it like that as opposed to the
longer form of therapy if getting into a
deeper dialogue with the self and and
you know tracing those things back to
where they come from and so on but it is
the the founder of one of the founders
of CBT was was was explicitly taking it
from the stomach so it's a very it's
interesting how that how that is coming
back and I want to wonder what it is
what it is in our culture that's now
made us stoicism seems very very popular
now and there's that that that's sort of
a awareness presume it's a reaction
against against psychoanalysis I suppose
it's a yearning for shorter quicker
answers which maybe taps into this
difficulty in tolerating ambivalence and
complexity maybe I think it's effective
therapy for many things but it's just
interesting how it's coming this I think
this is cultural cycles of sort of
rediscovering things yeah and I think I
think that happens with I think it
happens with yoga I think it happens
with meditation they become in vogue and
then they sort of die out for a while
when a new generation sort of forgets it
or doesn't learn and then someone
catches on to it 10-15 years later and
then it becomes very popular again and
then it's in articles and magazines then
people start talking about it then you
yeah it's it's weird things we do
without knowledge yeah you know I mean
this is our version of oral history we
just pass things on in this sort of a
weird way where you know we we forget
that these are tools and then people
start discussing their benefits and
discussing the the positive results
they've had with it and then it sort of
builds up it's a bit like the atheist
argument thing I was saying as an
atheist but we hung up on the knocking
down the things that are actually just
signpost back to something that is
important
it's vital but it's very difficult to
articulate yeah when Nietzsche said that
God is dead he meant that the the this
is sort of the young Theon the
unknowable God is now dead because we're
now we've established this thing that we
call God which is just like the big guy
and that you know we've we've put like a
box around it and gone as that and in
doing so we've kind of lost that touch
with that numinous unknowable thing
which irrespective of what you believe
it's like a religious belief which it's
represents something that an unknowable
force that that even as a you know a
hard-headed rationalist is sort of like
there's it yeah no honour that thing
because we need we need to know what it
is to step outside of ourselves yeah
honor that thing is a great way to put
it I think I think we have a really
strong desire for some sort of a
practice of humility and and and and
true aw and I would love to be I was if
you could go back in time and interact
with people where everyone believed in
Thor and Zeus and Odin it would probably
be absolutely fascinating to watch how
these people live their lives with this
undying faith in these deities that were
in control of all the matters of the
UNAM with no scientific knowledge at all
must be amazing and when you think about
the fact that that was I mean what how
many thousands of years of human history
people engaged with the universe like
that I think it's only two three hundred
years ago is only with the Enlightenment
that we dispensed with the humor humoral
theory of of medicine you know we
believed it was you know that the fire
and phlegm and all those that those kind
of ethereal substances in the body
that's like that's then it was only at
that point that medicine became
something that was could actually start
to fight against death ward off death so
which means death you know became
the enemy and that's where we start to
lose that kind of respectful you know
death is some sort of companion rather
than just some sort of stranger but that
let's that's only a that's only a couple
of hundred years ago so yeah you know
I'm a huge you know fan of the
Enlightenment of course and as a
magician of course you very quickly
develop a you know a love of well
certainly you develop that skeptical
attitude that yeah magicians have had
forever and it's kind of debunking and
and so on that always that goes
hand-in-hand debunking them you know the
charlatans and the the whole world of
sort of spiritual nonsense but but
that's a sort of a separate thing that's
a different that's a different thing and
again I only it can only articulate it
at all because it doesn't doesn't come
naturally you know I it's we find things
that were sort of compelling because
they don't come naturally do they so I
you know I I I don't quite know what
that means to me but I think if I if I
knew too easily what it meant to me it
might have lost something in there in
the mix you know I think that I think
the relationship to allowing your life
to to grow and to transform into
whatever that means has to be surely aa
drive at some level otherwise we're just
pacing up and down by that window yeah
otherwise what are we doing mm-hmm what
are we doing Darren well I have to go
see if my house is burnt to the ground
yes I do
so to these marshals here yeah marshals
here we're all good my family's in a
hotel but thank you thank you so really
fun discussion lately really enjoyed it
thank you so much and sacrifice is
available right now or Netflix right now
in that phase so there's three things on
Netflix there's sacrifice which is this
brand-new one this to push which is the
one we were talking about with the the
compliance experiment and there's also
the stage show miracle which was the the
faith healing thing I was talking about
as well and then there's a whole 20
years of stuff on YouTube I don't if you
can even access it in this country but I
bet we can
I bet you can Thank You Tara Bradley's
gentlemen
[Music]